Add VACUUM Advisor doc base and Bloat page (#160)
pganalyze/pganalyze-docs: vacuum-advisor/bloat.mdx

---
title: 'VACUUM Advisor: Bloat in Postgres'
backlink_href: /docs/vacuum-advisor
backlink_title: 'VACUUM Advisor'
---

> In Postgres, bloat refers to a situation that the physical size of a table on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Postgres, bloat refers to a situation when the physical size of a table on
```

disk is larger than its actual data size.

## Why does bloat happen?

> In Postgres, any DELETEs or UPDATEs create dead rows in the tables they modify.

Reviewer: I think we should mention MVCC somehow. We don't need to explain it at length, but if you have no idea what that is or why INSERTs or UPDATEs would create dead rows, we can at least give you something to look up. Something like
```suggestion
In Postgres, any DELETEs or UPDATEs create dead rows in the tables they modify. This is due to the MVCC mechanism that Postgres uses to support concurrent transactions.
```

VACUUM allows Postgres to reclaim these dead rows and reuse that space for
future INSERTs or UPDATEs. Autovacuum is designed to perform VACUUM regularly in

> order to efficiently reuse space. This helps ensure that INSERTs and UPDATEs can
> use existing space instead of claiming new space. This helps prevent unnecessary
> growth of tables by utilizing existing space.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
order to efficiently reuse space. This helps prevent unnecessary
table growth.
```
I think this could be more compact. Those extra words aren't saying anything.

### Insufficient VACUUMs

> If VACUUM is not performed with the appropriate frequency or at the right time,
> dead rows may not be reclaimed, causing the table to grow using new disk space
> even though there is available unused space.

Reviewer: In contrast, I think this could be more explicit. I think it would also flow better split up into separate sentences:

```suggestion
If VACUUM is not performed with the appropriate frequency or at the right time,
dead rows may not be reclaimed, or may not be reclaimed quickly enough. This can cause
the table to grow, using new disk space even though there is available unused space, since
that unused space is still occupied by dead rows.
```

### Inefficient VACUUMs

Even when VACUUM is performed sufficiently, it's possible that dead rows still
cannot be reclaimed. This can happen when transactions are still accessing those

> dead rows, and the xmin horizon — represents the point up to which point VACUUM
> can clean up dead rows — is held back.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dead rows, and the xmin horizon — representing the point up to which VACUUM
can clean up dead rows — is held back.
```

> As a result, VACUUM may not reclaim any or only a few dead rows, leading to bloat.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result, VACUUM may not reclaim enough dead rows, leading to bloat.
```

> ## Why bloat is so bad

Reviewer: Technically this works as a statement rather than a question, but I think having parallel construction in the titles (starting with "Why...") but having one as a question and another as a statement is kind of awkward. Also I think we should use a phrase a little more formal than "is so bad" :smile: . Maybe something like

```suggestion
## Why is bloat a problem?
```

Author: Thanks for this suggestion, I didn't like that title and but I wasn't able to come up something nice, so I was really seeking some suggestion 🙈

> Table bloat has several negative implications, primarily affecting the
> performance of your database.

Reviewer: It doesn't affect anything else, does it? If you have huge bloat problems, you probably have freezing problems, too, but we should cover that separately.
```suggestion
Table bloat has several negative implications for the performance of your database.
```

Author: I think we could say that increased disk space it also about the capacity problem. Though it's a tiny detail so I'm fine simplifying 👍

Reviewer: Ah good point. Yeah, I think we can probably gloss over disk space.

### Slower queries

Since bloated tables take more physical space for the same amount of actual data,
they take longer to read from disk, and take up more room when cached in memory.
This makes queries on these tables less efficient, because they have to do more
work to scan the same amount of data.

### Increased disk space and I/O

Table bloat unnecessarily consumes additional disk space and requires more I/O
operations to read and write the same amount of actual data.

## How to avoid bloat

> It is important to tune the VACUUM configuration to avoid insufficient VACUUMs.

Reviewer: I think the double negative here is kind of akward. Maybe
```suggestion
It is important to tune the VACUUM configuration to ensure VACUUMs are managing bloat.
```
or
```suggestion
It is important to tune the VACUUM configuration to ensure VACUUMs are keeping up with bloat.
```
?

> It is also important to monitor your database and taking action when the xmin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is also important to monitor your database and take action when the xmin
```

> horizon is held back, to avoid Inefficient VACUUMs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
horizon is held back, to avoid inefficient VACUUMs.
```
